Add 3.3 blog post (#842)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-330.mdx

---

> title: "Astro 3.3: <Picture /> component"

Reviewer: Not sure if it’s supported, but wondering if `&nbsp;` is usable here as this line break is a bit unfortunate?

<img width="802" alt="image" src="https://github.com/withastro/astro.build/assets/357379/4e5e679d-5d15-48c6-9730-cb891358afa0">

<img width="750" alt="image" src="https://github.com/withastro/astro.build/assets/357379/479ba539-7665-4f44-a6d6-f66170240e2d">

If not, perhaps we don’t need the HTML tag style for the title?

```suggestion
title: "Astro 3.3: Picture component"
```

(Haven’t tested but may also be more accessible? Guess the current version could be read out as “less than Picture slash greater than component?)

Author: Yep, good call!

> description: "Astro 3.3 is out with a brand new, experimental `<Picture />` component, improved compatability for syntax highlighting, and package provenance."

Reviewer 2: `compatability` -> `compatibility`
```suggestion
description: "Astro 3.3 is out with a brand new, experimental `<Picture />` component, improved compatibility for syntax highlighting, and package provenance."
```

publishDate: "October 12, 2023"
authors:
  - nate
  - erika
  - bjorn
  - ema
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-330/blog-hero-3_3-release.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-330/og-image-3_3-release.webp"
lang: "en"
---

> Astro 3.3 is out with a brand new, experimental `<Picture />` component, improved compatability for syntax highlighting, package provenance, and a handful of other quality of life improvements.

Reviewer 2: `compatability` -> `compatibility`
```suggestion
Astro 3.3 is out with a brand new, experimental `<Picture />` component, improved compatibility for syntax highlighting, package provenance, and a handful of other quality of life improvements.
```

- **[New `<Picture />` component](#picture-component)**
- **[Syntax Highlighting improvements](#syntax-highlighting)**
- **[Package Provenance](#package-provenance)**
- **[Quality of Life Improvements](#quality-of-life-improvements)**

> ```

Reviewer: The 3.2 post has a small introductory paragraph before the code snippet for a little extra context. Maybe we could add that here too?

````suggestion
To take advantage of the latest features, make sure you’re running the latest version of Astro. You can upgrade to Astro 3.3 by running the upgrade command for your package manager of choice:

```sh
````

npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Picture Component

> When we announced [Better Images in Astro](/blog/images/) with our built-in image optimization feature, we were proud to share our new vision for working with images. In 3.0 we removed our old image integration, and along with it some existing features we know you were using, to focus on building back better. We promised our image story was just getting started.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When we announced [Better Images in Astro](/blog/images/) with our built-in image optimization feature, we were proud to share our new vision for working with images. In 3.0 we removed our old image integration, and along with it some existing features we know you were using. We decided to build back better, with a stronger image story that was only getting started.
```

You might change this entirely, and go in a different direction. But this at least makes the sentences there more manageable.  :smile:

Author: This is great!

> When we announced [Better Images in Astro](/blog/images/) with our built-in image optimization feature, we committed to taking your feedback about the feature seriously.
> 
> Well, after [a comprehensive RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/715) and [the most highly upvoted PR](https://github.com/withastro/astro/pull/8620) in Astro's history, we are incredibly excited to introduce the built-in `<Picture />` component!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When we announced [Better Images in Astro](/blog/images/) with our built-in image optimization feature, we were proud to share our new vision for working with images. In 3.0 we removed our old image integration, and along with it some existing features we know you were using, to focus on building back better. We promised our image story was just getting started.

After [a comprehensive RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/715) and [the most highly upvoted PR](https://github.com/withastro/astro/pull/8620) in Astro's history, we are incredibly excited to introduce a built-in `<Picture />` component!
```
OK, this might be a little much, but here's *a* kind of take. What do you think of working off a feeling like this?

Author: I like it a lot!

The new, experimental `<Picture />` component can be used to generate a `<picture>` element with multiple `<source>` elements.

> The example below uses the `format` property to generate a `<source>` in each of the specified image formats:

Reviewer: The attribute shown below is `formats` plural, which I guess is the correct form?

```suggestion
The example below uses the `formats` property to generate a `<source>` in each of the specified image formats:
```

```

The above code will generate the following HTML, and allow the browser to determine the best image to display:

```html
<picture>
  <source srcset="..." type="image/avif" />
  <source srcset="..." type="image/webp" />
  <img src="..." alt="My super image in multiple formats!" />
</picture>
```

The `Picture` component takes all the same props as the `Image` component, including the new `densities` and `widths` properties.

## `srcset` support

In addition to the `<Picture />` element, two new properties have been added to `Image` and `getImage()`: `densities` and `widths`.

These properties can be used to generate a `srcset` attribute, either based on absolute widths in pixels (e.g. [300, 600, 900]) or pixel density descriptors (e.g. `["2x"]` or `[1.5, 2]`).

```astro
---
import { Image } from 'astro';
import myImage from './my-image.jpg';
---

<Image src={myImage} width={myImage.width / 2} densities={[1.5, 2]} alt="My cool image" />
```

```html
<img
  src="/_astro/my_image.hash.webp"
  srcset="/_astro/my_image.hash.webp 1.5x, /_astro/my_image.hash.webp 2x"
  alt="My cool image"
/>
```

## Syntax Highlighting

> Internally, Astro has migrated our internal syntax highlighter library from `shiki` to `shikiji`, an ESM-focused alternative that simplifies bundling and maintenance.

Reviewer: Small rework suggestion to remove the double “internal”:

```suggestion
We migrated Astro’s internal syntax highlighter library from `shiki` to `shikiji`, an ESM-focused alternative that simplifies bundling and maintenance.
```

Author: Wonderful catch, thanks!
